---
layout: commentary
---

# The Good News from Paul
 
Sunday is the Feast of the Conversion of St Paul and in this Year of Paul the Church allows the mass of the feast to be celebrated at one of the Sunday masses.  In doing so it gives us an opportunity to revisit St Paul in the light of some recent retrospectives of him. Scholarship has always debated the importance of his place in the Church and there can be no doubt that his missionary zeal for spreading the gospel was renowned. Some have interpreted this as proof that it was really Paul who was responsible for the founding of the Church rather than Jesus. That somehow Paul effectively distorted Jesus’ message making it into something that Jesus had never intended. Some scholars argue that Jesus’ message of the coming of the kingdom was to the Jews alone and that Paul, who never met Jesus, ended up creating something that Jesus would never have wanted. It’s an interesting argument which I think a simple reflection on what is central to the tradition that Paul received about Jesus will resolve.
 
If you go to Paul’s first letter to the Corinthians you will find that he writes about the two most important areas of our life as Christians. Firstly in Chapter 11 he writes about the Eucharist and in Chapter 15 about the Resurrection. On both occasions he prefaces what he writes by stating that what he is about to report is as a result of the tradition that he himself received. In other words he is telling us and his converts in Corinth that what we receive when we take part in the Eucharist comes not from him but from Jesus himself and that what we believe about the resurrection comes not as a result of anything but that which Paul himself received from the experience of those that witnessed the presence of the Risen Lord. This is so fundamental to Paul that he goes on and states that if Christ has not been raised then our preaching is without substance and so is your faith… if Christ has not been raised then your  faith is pointless.
 
These are tremendously powerful and in some ways shocking words since they convey the profundity of the conviction that Paul possessed. There is no flippancy here but an earnest and burning desire to express the sheer magnitude and enormity of what these events mean. If none of it is true then as Paul admits we’ve all been conned and sold a pup, but he doesn’t believe it’s not true. He’s told us that for three years after his conversion he went of to Arabia where he no doubt debated and argued the whole thing in his mind. He was utterly convinced by the truth of what he had received, by the conversion he had undergone, and by the belief that now Christ lived in him.
 
The Good News that he proclaims therefore is not of his making but it is the life of the Risen Lord living in him and that is his preaching. This preaching is summed up by him in his words to the Galatians when he tells them I am living in faith, faith in the Son of God who loved me and gave himself for me. For Paul this was the meaning of Jesus’ death and resurrection and his task was now to bring this message of hope to as many people as he could. It took him on many a hazardous and difficult journey. It involved him in heated debates and arguments with those who had known Jesus and it caused him much hardship and disappointment. In all of this he knew that the message he proclaimed was nothing but the tradition that he himself had received and which he was now passing on and that by doing so he was carrying out the command of Jesus that the time is fulfilled the kingdom of God is close at hand. Repent and believe the Good News.   
       
 
Deacon Anthony
 
