---
layout: commentary
---

# Holy Family
 
I’m often left a bit perplexed by what the Church wants us to take from this feast. Don’t misunderstand me, I think it’s a good thing especially in this day and age to think about the family and its role in the bringing up of children, but not all families have children and not all children live with two parents. As a result the model of the Holy Family and the Church’s emphasis on it as the model of perfection for every Christian family can seem rather overbearing. Moreover celebrating the feast at this time of year, when things can get a little tense makes you wonder.
 
Of course there are many positive things that we can take from the feast that will help to nurture family life and therefore of itself it is proper that we value and support the family as an institution and as the best model for the bringing up of our children. Nevertheless I also think that it would be wrong and misguided to ignore how the family of Jesus Mary and Joseph itself changed and developed over the years and to see in those changes and developments issues and challenges that mirror our own experiences. If we can do that then this feast will offer us some insight into the reality of family life as we know it but suffused with a love that sees and knows the hardships and difficulties that all families experience and go through. Doing so takes away from the Holy Family the somewhat saccharine image that has incorrectly attached itself to it and brings it instead into the realm that it is meant to inhabit.
 
The death of a parent from a child’s point of view is probably the most traumatic thing that can happen to it. For a child to suddenly have a loving mother or father die must be a catastrophe. So many emotions and feelings are churned up, not least of which must be both bewilderment and anger. For Jesus the loss of Joseph must surely have caused him to feel these emotions too. The loving father who had helped teach him to read and write, helped teach him about the love of God and neighbour was suddenly no longer there. Coping with such an event has no template and for those children who have to experience it they are very often left floundering as to know how to cope.
 
Also as children grow and approach adulthood the generation gap often becomes a point of tension. The hopes and expectations of the parents are not always matched by the wants of the child and the contrast can become divisive. As Jesus began his ministry we feel some of that tension between him and his family as they questioned what he was about and what his decisions were doing to his family.
 
So we can see how the Holy Family of Nazareth was not immune to the problems of family life. They experienced all the ups and downs that so many families have to deal with. What then can we learn from this? I think that it is a great encouragement and comfort to know that these issues were felt and lived by Jesus and his family. It makes it possible for us to cast aside the sense of how can we with all the pressures and stresses that bombard family life today be expected to live an impossible expectation. But if we know that Jesus lived and was brought up in a family that although it experienced tragedy, as well as poverty, that although it had to deal with anxiety and tension, it was also able to enjoy the pleasure of a happy family occasion together (wedding feast at Cana) then we have something that is akin to that which we experience in our families. And to know that it was bound by the bond of God’s love gives us grounds for hope and reason enough to celebrate. 
 
Deacon Anthony
