---
layout: commentary
---

# Christian in life and in death
 
Of itself, is it possible to speak of joy in a way that defines it in Christian terms or is joy simply a state of being that cannot be appropriated or rendered as something intrinsic to faith but is nevertheless part of what it means to be human? When we listen to the words of Isaiah at this Sunday’s mass where are our thoughts and our minds? Are they caught up in the mystery of what Isaiah proclaims or are they somewhere completely different, wound up with the whirl of all that is going on around us?
 
Jesus looked at this very reading from Isaiah and read it out at the synagogue in his hometown of Nazareth. He appended the reading with his own proclamation these words are being fulfilled today even while you are listening.  Did they fill anyone with joy or did they fall on deaf ears? Ears that were too tired to hear, ears that were overwhelmed with hardship, ears that had become deaf to any notion of human joy let alone divine joy! Well the gospel tells us that his fellow villagers at first heard his words with great enthusiasm and joy, which however, soon turned to rage and anger, ending up in an attempt to lynch him.  Where does all of this leave us in what has been the major topic of debate this week? 
 
It’s been a tough week and the broadcast on the TV of the suicide of a terminally ill man has highlighted some very profound questions. Not just about the rights and wrongs of broadcasting it, but about the whole issue of assisted suicide and what should be society’s response. Whilst the debate over this will no doubt gather pace and become more and more heated, I want to focus our thoughts into one area that we as Christians should not allow to go unheard. When in such moments the Christian viewpoint is put forward, it is often challenged with arguments that seek to dismiss what it says as outdated, on the grounds that it fails to understand the reality of what is happening to the individual concerned. It will be argued that Christian morality and ethics place their emphasis on the necessity to do all that is possible to preserve life, even if that means overriding the wishes of the person who wants to die by taking their own life and/or getting someone to assist them in doing so.  Many people will argue that if the person is terminally ill and wants to spare his family from unnecessary suffering, what right has the Church to say “no this is wrong”. The Church, they will say, is living in a bygone age, another world far removed from the real one in which people live. 
 
We should remember something very pertinent here. The Church was founded because a man died. He died a real death, a violent death, an agonising death, a painful death, and a suffering death that was inflicted upon him. It was a death that left behind bereaved and shattered people who had to pick up the pieces of their lives. People who were left to wonder how they were going to go on and so to argue that the Church and Christianity doesn’t understand what people who are terminally ill as well as those who love them go through, should be placed in that context.
 
We should seek to inform people of this as best we can so that they can come to understand how Christians see life and death as part of one and the same mystery. A mystery that Jesus Christ himself entered into in all of its joys and sorrows and that ultimately for us, he broke the fear of death. Because of what Jesus underwent for all humanity we have been given a life and a death which gathers up every life and death and brings them all to a meaning that as yet we are still seeking to understand. Euthanasia assisted or not, like every taking of a life does not bring us closer to  reaching this understanding but rather drives us farther and farther away from it.  
 
Deacon Anthony
